Consumer markets
When we talk about consumer markets, we are including those individuals and households who buy and consume goods and services for their own personal use.
They are not interested in reselling the product or setting themselves up as a manufacturer. Considering the thousands of new products, services, and ideas
being introduced each day and the increased capability of consumers to afford these products, the size, complexity, and future growth potential of the
consumer market is staggering. The next chapter, “Marketing research: an aid to decision making”, touches on many of these issues.
Industrial markets
The industrial market consists of organizations and the people who work for them, those who buy products or services for use in their own businesses or to
make other products. For example, a steel mill might purchase computer software, pencils, and flooring as part of the operation and maintenance of their
business. Likewise, a refrigerator manufacturer might purchase sheets of steel, wiring, shelving, and so forth, as part of its final product.2 These
purchases occur in the industrial market.
There is substantial evidence that industrial markets function differently than do consumer markets and that the buying process in particular is different.
Institutional markets
Another important market sector is made up of various types of profit and nonprofit institutions, such as hospitals, schools, churches, and government
agencies. Institutional markets differ from typical businesses in that they are not motivated primarily by profits or market share. Rather, institutions tend
to satisfy somewhat esoteric, often intangible, needs. Also, whatever profits exist after all expenses are paid are normally put back into the institution.
Because institutions operate under different restrictions and employ different goals, marketers must use different strategies to be successful.
Reseller markets
All intermediaries that buy finished or semi-finished products and resell them for profit are part of the reseller market. This market includes approximately
383,000 wholesalers and 1,300,000 retailers that operate in the US. With the exception of products obtained directly from the producer, all products are sold
through resellers. Since resellers operate under unique business characteristics, they must be approached carefully. Producers are always cognizant of the
fact that successful marketing to resellers is just as important as successful marketing to consumers.
AD 1: The Olympus camera is part of the consumer market.
